



Network Working Group                                        B. Gondwana
Internet-Draft                                                  Fastmail
Intended status: Standards Track                              R. Clayton
Expires: 7 May 2026                                                Yahoo
                                                               W. Chuang
                                                                  Google
                                                         3 November 2025


       DKIM2 - signing the source and destination of every email
                  draft-ietf-dkim-dkim2-motivation-02

Abstract

   This memo provides a rationale for building a new email
   accountability mechanism, based on the lessons learned from
   implementing the ARC experiment from RFC 8617 and other experiences
   from email system operators.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 7 May 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.











Gondwana, et al.           Expires 7 May 2026                   [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Motivation               November 2025


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Background and motivations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Some properties for a system which would solve these
           issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Explicit signing of all legitimate recipients for each
           message . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  A chain of aligned signatures over multiple SMTP
           transactions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.3.  A signed bounce format, sent in reverse along the same
           path  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.4.  A way to describe changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       2.4.1.  Security gateways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   3.  Goals to be addressed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.1.  DKIM-replay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.2.  Backscatter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  Other areas of interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.1.  Algorithmic dexterity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.2.  Sender indications of intent  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.3.  Signer requests for feedback  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.4.  Simplification of signed header list  . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  Security  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Appendix A.  Changes from Earlier Versions  . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     A.1.  draft-ietf-dkim-dkim2-motivation-02:  . . . . . . . . . .  10
     A.2.  draft-ietf-dkim-dkim2-motivation-01:  . . . . . . . . . .  10
     A.3.  draft-ietf-dkim-dkim2-motivation-00:  . . . . . . . . . .  10
     A.4.  draft-gondwana-dkim2-motivation-03: . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     A.5.  draft-gondwana-dkim2-motivation-02: . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     A.6.  draft-gondwana-dkim2-motivation-01: . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     A.7.  draft-gondwana-dkim2-motivation-00: . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11









Gondwana, et al.           Expires 7 May 2026                   [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Motivation               November 2025


1.  Background and motivations

   In 2007, [DKIM] (Domain Key Identified Mail / DKIM) was published,
   outlining a mechanism for a domain to sign email in a way that
   recipients could ensure that the email had come from an entity
   possessing the secret key matching a public key published in the DNS
   by the source domain.

   [DKIM] has been updated and extended many times since then, and a
   large amount of operational experience has been gained using it.

   There are a number of things beyond authenticating the original email
   that would be useful for mail system operators, particularly when it
   travels through multiple hops.  There have been other attempts to
   solve some of these problems, e.g. [ARC] (Authenticated Received
   Chain / ARC), however they have not achieved the same level of
   widespread use as DKIM.

   In particular, the following issues frustrate email system system
   operators:

   1.  You can legitimately receive a validly DKIM signed email, where
       there is no evidence inside the signed part that you were an
       intended recipient

   2.  An email can have a bounce (SMTP-FROM) email address for a domain
       which was never involved in the transit of that message

   3.  An email can be altered by forwarders or mailing lists, and
       there’s no way to know what parts of the message were changed

   In the first two cases, a solution would be to have the sending
   system provide an unforgeable digital signature describing its
   identity and intent, such that if all parties involved in transiting
   versions of an email participate, there is no way for a third party
   to pretend to have been legitimately involved in processing the
   email, or to change or redirect the email in any way.

   In the third case, a solution would be to provide a way to describe
   how to undo the changes, such that each domain's signature can be
   attributed to the version of the message that was seen by systems
   which can sign on behalf of that domain.

2.  Some properties for a system which would solve these issues







Gondwana, et al.           Expires 7 May 2026                   [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Motivation               November 2025


2.1.  Explicit signing of all legitimate recipients for each message

   By ensuring that the complete list of legitimate recipients for a
   message is encoded in the signed content of the message, it will
   become possible for receiving systems to confirm that they are an
   intended next hop for a message, and reject messages which the signer
   did not intend for them to receive.

   Even if a message is BCC'd, a copy of that message sent to the BCC
   recipient can have that recipient address mentioned, without sending
   the same exact copy to the other recipients.

   This mechanism does not survive naive forwarders, where the new
   destination address will not be explicitly mentioned, however a
   recipient system can track which addresses forward to it, and accept
   just those.

   Over time as more software is updated to add signatures, the need to
   use heuristics becomes smaller, and eventually it will become
   possible to reject any messages where the [SMTP] RCPT TO forward-path
   addresses are not all present in the highest signature number header.

2.2.  A chain of aligned signatures over multiple SMTP transactions

   By having the initial signature be from the domain aligned to the
   From or Sender header, and each following hop adding its own
   signature with the domain of the recipient of the previous hop, it is
   possible to create a chain of custody where each recipient has
   confirmed that it should have received the message, and then signed
   the content with a key for its own domain.

   If the recipient wishes to forward the message on to another address,
   it must apply its own DKIM2 header, signed by a key which is aligned
   to the domain of the recipient address in the previous DKIM2 header,
   and with a bounce address which is in the same domain.

   The end result is, like ARC, a chain of domains which have handled
   the message; however unlike ARC, this chain MUST be fully linked in
   both directions, with every sending address aligning to the recipient
   address of the previous DKIM2 header.











Gondwana, et al.           Expires 7 May 2026                   [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Motivation               November 2025


2.3.  A signed bounce format, sent in reverse along the same path

   By having the mail-from address be signed and aligned to the signing
   domain, and having the bounce format include the signature headers of
   the message being bounced, it is required to have directly received
   the message to generate a bounce for it.  This requirement eliminates
   the ability to cause backscatter entirely, as bounces can only go to
   a domain that sent the message, and only be sent from a domain which
   explicitly received that message.

   The ability to avoid backscatter will allow receiving systems to
   delay their decisions about whether to accept a message, since they
   can make the decision without holding the connection open.  This
   removes the need for mitigations like greylisting and even reduces
   the need for junk mail folders in jurisdictions where it is forbidden
   to discard messages once they are accepted.

   Since the DSN messages always go back up the DKIM2 chain, any hop can
   strip off the higher number (i=) records; including the sender and
   recipient addresses for them, and create a bounce as if the forwarder
   itself was doing the rejection.

   This would not be possible with SMTP-transaction-time rejection, as
   you can't reliably hold open the connection from the previous hop
   while you talk to the next hop.

   As asynchronous bounces will be common in DKIM2, this case becomes
   indistinguishable to the sender, allowing privacy-preserving
   forwarders to seamlessly operate.

   Passing bounces back along the outgoing path also allows mailing
   lists to take responsibility for the event and not bother the person
   who sent a message to the list.

   Provided that an email is correctly signed when received, it can be
   rejected at a later point in time.  The DSN will be sent to the
   immediately preceding intermediary.  Since the bounce travels back
   along the (fully authenticated) incoming path it cannot be sent to an
   uninvolved third party.

2.4.  A way to describe changes

   ARC describes a separate "Seal" header which which never gets
   modified, however this still allows an intermediate to make massive
   changes to a message and claim that it was still the original
   message.  If a message goes through more than one set of
   modifications, it becomes impossible for the receiver to know what
   changes were made by each intermediary.



Gondwana, et al.           Expires 7 May 2026                   [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Motivation               November 2025


   By defining an algebra sufficient to describe how to undo common
   changes, we can allow the receiver to compare the eventual message
   received with the original message sent, and decide which parties
   involved in changing the message are making the kind of changes that
   the recipient doesn't want.

   Mailing lists (or alumni forwarders etc.) that alter the Subject
   header field (or other [IMF] headers) will record the previous header
   field contents.  This is easy to undo for checking purposes.

   Mailing lists that add text (either to a simple email body or one or
   more MIME parts within the body) will record details of the text they
   have added.  This text can then be removed when checking earlier
   signatures.

2.4.1.  Security gateways

   There are some types of alteration, for example by security gateways,
   that may be impractical to describe in a cost-effective manner.

   We would expect that outgoing gateways that may be adding disclaimers
   or rewriting internal identifiers would be provided with appropriate
   signing keys so that they could be the "first hop" as far as the rest
   of the email handling chain is concerned.

   Incoming security gateways may be making substantial changes.
   Typically they will remove problematic types of attachment and
   rewrite URLs to use "interstitials".

   Since this type of functionality is generally provided on a
   contracted basis, further intermediaries will be fully aware of the
   presence of the security gateway and can be configured to implicitly
   trust that it has checked earlier signatures and found them to be
   correct.  Hence there is no need to be able to "undo" these changes,
   however there's still value in indicating which system made these
   changes.

3.  Goals to be addressed

3.1.  DKIM-replay

   Because an email can currently be sent as "Bcc" such that there's no
   evidence in the message data of who the recipient is expected to be,
   it's possible to take a message that is correctly signed and replay
   it millions of times to different destination addresses as if they
   had been BCC'd.  This message can be resent at any time.





Gondwana, et al.           Expires 7 May 2026                   [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Motivation               November 2025


   DKIM2 headers will always have timestamps so that "old" signatures
   have no value.

   A possibility to be investigated during testing is a "singleton" flag
   to allow senders to specify that this is a message for a single
   recipient (e.g. for authentication codes for billing transactions)
   and should not be expanded by mailing lists.

   DKIM2 headers specify both "from" and "to" so that most opportunities
   to alter a message, re-sign it and replay it at scale will no longer
   be possible.  Since the "to" address is always encoded in the email,
   any email to multiple recipients must be exploded by the sender, and
   each copy signed separately with different headers.

   If the email is replayed (perhaps through a large system with many
   different customers) then if the email does not say that it has been
   duplicated then signatures can be assumed to be unique and hence
   simple caching (or Bloom filters) will identify replays.  If the
   email has been duplicated then recipients can assign a reputation to
   the entity that did the duplication (along with the expected number
   of duplicates that will arrive from that entity) and assess duplicate
   signatures on that basis.

   If the email is altered before duplication then it is again the case
   that this will be apparent to the recipient who can develop a
   reputation system for the entity that did the modification and
   replay.

3.2.  Backscatter

   The problem of backscatter, delivery status notifications sent to
   innocent third parties who had their address forged as the source of
   a message, has caused email recipients to implement a variety of
   countermeasures:

   *  in-band scanning: performing detailed analysis of the email
      content before replying to the DATA phase of the SMTP transaction,
      allowing immediate rejection but consuming resources on both ends
      of the connection, and limiting the time that can be used for the
      analysis to avoid timeouts.

   *  greylisting: replying with a temporary failure code to untrusted
      senders, allowing time to decide if the sender is trustworthy
      enough, but also delaying mail for an indeterminate period.







Gondwana, et al.           Expires 7 May 2026                   [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Motivation               November 2025


   *  delivery to "Spam" or "Junk" mailboxes - in some jurisdictions
      it's not allowed to discard email that has been accepted, so
      providers must put the copy somewhere once they have accepted it,
      filling Junk mailboxes even if they're very sure it's bad.

   By requiring bounce addresses to aligned with the most recent
   signature domain, we can avoid backscatter, allowing recipients to
   always take the message, and later return a bounce.  This fulfils any
   legal obligation to inform the sender if the message isn't delivered,
   while also avoiding the timeout and greylisting re-connection issue
   that currently exists, so messages are spooled for less time on
   intermediates, and recipients can take their time to analyse
   messages; even delivering the message to a mailbox and then upon
   receiving further intelligence, undoing the delivery and generating a
   bounce.

   Privacy-preserving forwarding services will also see every bounce
   from any dkim2-supporting destination mailbox, allowing them to strip
   off the details of the further hop(s) and generate a bounce as if
   they had been the terminal node of the delivery and were just making
   a delayed decision.

4.  Other areas of interest

4.1.  Algorithmic dexterity

   The final specification will require both RSA and elliptic curve be
   implemented for algorithmic agility.  However this document
   acknowledges the long standing lack of adoption of elliptic curve
   ,and elliptic curve support may not be needed for development.  The
   specifications will provide support for multiple algorithms.  If
   there is IETF consensus around a "post-quantum" scheme then that will
   also be included.

   Dexterity will become essential if advances in cryptanalysis cause a
   particular type of algorithm to become deprecated.  To allow a phased
   switch away from such an algorithm we will make provision for more
   than one signature to be present in a single DKIM2 header.  Systems
   capable of checking both signatures will require both to be correct.
   If only one signature is correct then email will be rejected with a
   clear message -- allowing interworking issues to be easily debugged.

   To allow for future dexterity, it makes sense to allow multiple
   signatures with the same or different algorithms, from the same
   domain, on the same message.






Gondwana, et al.           Expires 7 May 2026                   [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Motivation               November 2025


4.2.  Sender indications of intent

   Having a way to indicate "the sender wants you not to make any
   modifications to this message" will allow senders to indicate the
   same intent they current achieve with a DMARC p=reject policy to stop
   messages which don't have a verifying DKIM signature.

   Having a way to indicate "this message is for a single recipient" has
   been requested by some services like document signature services.

   Having a way to indicate "this message will be useless after time X"
   will be useful for things like confirmation codes which have limited
   validity, allowing intermediate systems to return the message if they
   haven't been able to complete delivery by the expiry time.

4.3.  Signer requests for feedback

   Each signer on the chain may wish to receive feedback about messages,
   in the way that they currently use multiple DKIM signatures along
   with DMARC policies.

   We can add a flag to allow intermediate signers (email sending
   providers, mailing lists, forwarders, etc) to say whether they wish
   to receive feedback about each message that they sign.

4.4.  Simplification of signed header list

   Currently DKIM signatures list a particular number of copies of each
   header field which are included in the signature, and the signer can
   choose exactly which headers to sign.

   It is both valuable to mandate a set of headers, and the existence of
   a change algebra will allow us to insist that all copies of a named
   header field are always signed, reducing the risk of header stuffing
   attacks.

5.  Security

   TBA

6.  IANA Considerations

   TBA

7.  Normative References






Gondwana, et al.           Expires 7 May 2026                   [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Motivation               November 2025


   [ARC]      Andersen, K., Long, B., Ed., Blank, S., Ed., and M.
              Kucherawy, Ed., "The Authenticated Received Chain (ARC)
              Protocol", RFC 8617, DOI 10.17487/RFC8617, July 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8617>.

   [DKIM]     Crocker, D., Ed., Hansen, T., Ed., and M. Kucherawy, Ed.,
              "DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) Signatures", STD 76,
              RFC 6376, DOI 10.17487/RFC6376, September 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6376>.

   [IMF]      Resnick, P., Ed., "Internet Message Format", RFC 5322,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5322, October 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5322>.

   [SMTP]     Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 5321,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5321, October 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5321>.

Appendix A.  Changes from Earlier Versions

   [[This section to be removed by RFC Editor]]

A.1.  draft-ietf-dkim-dkim2-motivation-02:

   *  Updated the background and motivations to be more about the
      problems

   *  Moved "simplification of signed header list" into the "other
      areas", it's not core to solving the underlying problems.

A.2.  draft-ietf-dkim-dkim2-motivation-01:

   *  saying DKIM1 is silly, just calling it DKIM

   *  updated DKIM reference to RFC6376

   *  use named references

A.3.  draft-ietf-dkim-dkim2-motivation-00:

   *  no changes other than the name

A.4.  draft-gondwana-dkim2-motivation-03:

   *  typo fixes

   *  updated title




Gondwana, et al.           Expires 7 May 2026                  [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Motivation               November 2025


   *  allowed for multiple recipients to be signed (but still all
      legtimiate recipients MUST be explicitly signed)

   *  rewrote to be more "motivation/goals" and less "implementation
      design"

   *  removed the 'obsoletes'

A.5.  draft-gondwana-dkim2-motivation-02:

   *  changed section title because DKIM1/2 do not really interwork as
      such

   *  removed implementation details, this is the motivation doc

   *  significant rewrite based on feedback from mailing list

A.6.  draft-gondwana-dkim2-motivation-01:

   *  remove the z= parameter on the grounds that it adds too much
      complexity

   *  document that messages MUST NOT re-enter the DKIM2 world once the
      chain has been broken.

A.7.  draft-gondwana-dkim2-motivation-00:

   *  initial version

Authors' Addresses

   Bron Gondwana
   Fastmail
   Email: brong@fastmailteam.com


   Richard Clayton
   Yahoo
   Email: rclayton@yahooinc.com


   Wei Chuang
   Google
   Email: weihaw@google.com







Gondwana, et al.           Expires 7 May 2026                  [Page 11]
