



Network Working Group                                         R. Clayton
Internet-Draft                                                     Yahoo
Intended status: Standards Track                               W. Chuang
Expires: 3 September 2026                                         Google
                                                             B. Gondwana
                                                        Fastmail Pty Ltd
                                                            2 March 2026


            DomainKeys Identified Mail Signatures v2 (DKIM2)
                      draft-clayton-dkim2-spec-08

Abstract

   DomainKeys Identified Mail v2 (DKIM2) permits a person, role, or
   organization that owns a signing domain to document that it has
   handled an email message by associating their domain with the
   message.  This is achieved by providing a hash value that has been
   calculated on the current contents of the message and then applying a
   cryptographic signature that covers the hash values and other details
   about the transmission of the message.  Verification is performed by
   querying an entry within the signing domain's DNS space to retrieve
   an appropriate public key.  As a message is transferred from author
   to recipient systems that alter the body or header fields will
   provide details of their changes and calculate new hash values.
   Further signatures will be added to provide a validatable "chain".
   This permits validators to identify the nature of changes made by
   intermediaries and apply a reputation to the systems that made
   changed.  DKIM2 also allows recipients to detect when messages have
   been unexpectedly "replayed" and will ensure that Delivery Status
   Notifications are only sent to entities that were involved in the
   transmission of a message.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."




Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   This Internet-Draft will expire on 3 September 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  DKIM2 Architecture Documents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Terminology and Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  Signer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.2.  Forwarder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.3.  Reviser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.4.  Verifier  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.5.  Signing Domain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.6.  Whitespace  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.7.  Imported ABNF Tokens  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.8.  Common ABNF Tokens  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   3.  Signing and Verification Cryptographic Algorithms . . . . . .   7
     3.1.  The SHA256 Hashing Algorithm  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.2.  The RSA-SHA256 Signing Algorithm  . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.3.  The Ed25519-SHA256 Signing Algorithm  . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.4.  Other Algorithms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.5.  Selectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.6.  Key Management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   4.  Recipes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.1.  Header Recipes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.2.  Body Recipes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   5.  Message Hash Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     5.1.  Computing the Body Hash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.2.  Computing the Header Fields Hash  . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   6.  SMTP parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   7.  Message Signature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   8.  Tag=Value Lists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   9.  The Message-Instance Header Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   10. The DKIM2-Signature Header Field  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   11. Signer Actions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23



Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


     11.1.  Add any Necessary Message-Instance Header Fields . . . .  23
     11.2.  Provide a "chain of custody" for the message . . . . . .  24
     11.3.  The Relaxed Domain Match Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . .  25
     11.4.  Select a Private Key and Corresponding Selector Value  .  25
     11.5.  Calculate a Signature Value  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
   12. Verifier Actions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
     12.1.  Output States  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
     12.2.  Validation of Tag Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
     12.3.  Fetching the Public Key  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
     12.4.  Perform the Signature Verification Calculation . . . . .  29
     12.5.  Check Most Recent Signature and Hashes for the
            Message  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
     12.6.  Checking the Message-Instance Header Fields  . . . . . .  30
     12.7.  Checking the DKIM2-Signature Header Fields . . . . . . .  31
     12.8.  Interpret Results/Apply Local Policy . . . . . . . . . .  31
   13. Delivery Status Notifications in the DKIM2 ecosystem  . . . .  31
     13.1.  DSN contents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
       13.1.1.  Bounce propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
       13.1.2.  Authentication of inbound bounce notifications . . .  32
   14. Preventing Transport Conversions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
   15. EAI (RFC6530) considerations for DKIM2  . . . . . . . . . . .  34
   16. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34
   17. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34
   18. Changes from Earlier Versions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34
   19. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35
     19.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35
     19.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37

1.  Introduction

   DomainKeys Identified Mail v2 (DKIM2) permits a person, role, or
   organization to document that they have handled an email message by
   associating a domain name [RFC1034] with the message [RFC5322].  A
   public key signature is used to record that they have been able to
   read the contents of the message and write to it.

   Verification of claims is achieved by fetching a public key stored in
   the DNS under the relevant domain and then checking the signature.

   Message transit from author to recipient is through Forwarders that
   typically make no substantive change to the message content and thus
   preserve the DKIM2 signature.  Where they do make a change the
   changes they have made are documented so that these can be "undone"
   and the original signature validated.






Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   When a message is forwarded from one system to another an additional
   DKIM2 signature is added on each occasion.  This chain of custody
   assists validators in distinguishing between messages that were
   intended to be sent to a particular email address and those that are
   being "replayed" to that address.

   The chain of custody can also be used to ensure that delivery status
   notifications are only sent to entities that were involved in the
   transmission of a message.

   Organizations that process a message can add to their signature a
   request for feedback as to any opinion (for example, that the email
   was considered to be spam) that the eventual recipient of the message
   wishes to share.

1.1.  DKIM2 Architecture Documents

   Readers are advised to be familiar with the material in TBA, TBA and
   TBA which provide the background for the development of DKIM2, an
   overview of the service, and deployment and operations guidance and
   advice.

2.  Terminology and Definitions

   This section defines terms used in the rest of the document.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   [RFC2119].  These words take their normative meanings only when they
   are presented in ALL UPPERCASE.

   DKIM2 is designed to operate within the Internet Mail service, as
   defined in [RFC5598].  Basic email terminology is taken from that
   specification.

   DKIM2 inherits many ideas from DKIM ([RFC6376]) which, for clarity we
   refer to in this specification as DKIM1.  In addition, some features
   were influenced by experience with (see [CONCLUDEARC]) the
   experimental ARC protocol ([RFC8617]).

   Syntax descriptions use Augmented BNF (ABNF) [RFC5234].









Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   This document uses JSON [RFC8259] for collections of related
   information.  The JSON objects are then base64 encoded and placed
   into Tag=Value lists.  This is done to avoid significant complexities
   in parsing Tag=Value lists (see Section 8) and to simplify the way in
   which algorithmic agility is provided.  Unrecognised fields within
   JSON objects MUST be ignored.

2.1.  Signer

   Elements in the mail system that sign messages on behalf of a domain
   are referred to as Signers.  These may be MUAs (Mail User Agents),
   MSAs (Mail Submission Agents), MTAs (Mail Transfer Agents), or other
   agents such as mailing list "exploders".  In general, any Signer will
   be involved in the injection of a message into the message system in
   some way.  The key point is that a message must be signed before it
   leaves the administrative domain of the Signer.

2.2.  Forwarder

   [RFC5598] defines a Relay as transmitting or retransmitting a message
   but states that it will not modify the envelope information or the
   message content semantics.  It also defines a Gateway as a hybrid of
   User and Relay that connects heterogeneous mail services.  In this
   document we use the concept of a Forwarder which is an MTA that
   receives a message and then, as an alternative to delivering it into
   a destination mailbox, can forward it on to another system in an
   automated, pre-determined, manner.

2.3.  Reviser

   As will be seen, a Forwarder may alter the message content or header
   fields, in such a way that existing signatures on the message will no
   longer validate.  If so, then a record will be made of these changes.
   We call a Forwarder that makes such changes a Reviser.

2.4.  Verifier

   Elements in the mail system that verify signatures are referred to as
   Verifiers.  These may be Forwarders, Revisers, MTAs, Mail Delivery
   Agents (MDAs), or MUAs.  It is an expectation of DKIM2 that a
   recipient of a message will wish to verify some or all signatures
   before determining whether or not to accept the message or pass it on
   to another entity.








Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


2.5.  Signing Domain

   A domain name associated with a signature.  This domain may be
   associated with the author of an email, their organization, a company
   hired to deliver the email, a mailing list operator, or some other
   entity that handles email.  What they have in common is that at some
   point they had access to the entire contents of the email and were in
   a position to add their signature to the email.

2.6.  Whitespace

   There are two forms of whitespace used in this specification:

   *  WSP represents simple whitespace, i.e., a space or a tab character
      (formal definition in [RFC5234]).

   *  FWS is folding whitespace.  It allows multiple lines separated by
      CRLF followed by at least one whitespace, to be joined.

   The formal ABNF for these are (WSP given for information only):

   WSP =   SP / HTAB
   FWS =   [*WSP CRLF] 1*WSP

   The definition of FWS is identical to that in [RFC5322] except for
   the exclusion of obs-FWS.

2.7.  Imported ABNF Tokens

   The following tokens are imported from other RFCs as noted.  Those
   RFCs should be considered definitive.

   The following tokens are imported from [RFC5321]:

   *  "local-part" (implementation warning: this permits quoted strings)

   *  "sub-domain"

   The following tokens are imported from [RFC5322]:

   *  "field-name" (name of a header field)

   Other tokens not defined herein are imported from [RFC5234].  These
   are intuitive primitives such as SP, HTAB, WSP, ALPHA, DIGIT, CRLF,
   etc.






Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


2.8.  Common ABNF Tokens

   The following ABNF tokens are used elsewhere in this document:

   VALCHAR      =  %x21-3A / %x3C-7E
                     ; EXCLAMATION to TILDE except SEMICOLON
   ALPHADIGITPS =  (ALPHA / DIGIT / "+" / "/")
   ALNUMPUNC    =  ALPHA / DIGIT / "_"

   base64string =  ALPHADIGITPS *([FWS] ALPHADIGITPS)
                   [ [FWS] "=" [ [FWS] "=" ] ]
   textstring   =  VALCHAR * (FWS / VALCHAR)

   Note that base64strings are defined in [RFC4648], but that document
   does not contain any ABNF.  Note that a base64string MUST be padded
   with trailing = characters if needed.

   Note that the definitions of both textstring and base64string allow
   for the presence of FWS, which simplifies folding header fields to an
   allowable line length.  FWS within base64strings will be ignored when
   their value is being used.  FWS within a textstring MUST be treated
   as a single space when this value is used.

3.  Signing and Verification Cryptographic Algorithms

   DKIM2 supports multiple hashing and digital signature algorithms.
   One hash function (SHA256) if specified here and two signing
   algorithms are defined by this specification: RSA-SHA256 and
   Ed25519-SHA256.  Signers and Verifiers MUST implement SHA256.
   Signers SHOULD implement both RSA-SHA256 and Ed25519-SHA256.
   Verifiers MUST implement both RSA-SHA256 and Ed25519-SHA256.

3.1.  The SHA256 Hashing Algorithm

   The SHA256 hashing algorithm is used to compute body and header
   hashes as defined in Section 5.1 and Section 5.2.

   The resultant values are stored in JSON objects (identified by the
   text string "sha256") within Message-Instance header fields.

3.2.  The RSA-SHA256 Signing Algorithm

   The RSA-SHA256 Signing Algorithm computes a hash over all the
   Message-Instance and DKIM2-Signature header fields as described in
   Section 11.5 using SHA-256 (FIPS-180-4-2015) as the hash-alg.  That
   hash is then signed by the Signer using the RSA algorithm (defined in
   PKCS#1 version 1.5 [RFC8017]) as the crypt-alg and the Signer's
   private key.  The hash MUST NOT be truncated or converted into any



Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   form other than the native binary form before being signed.  The
   signing algorithm MUST use a public exponent of 65537.

   Signers MUST use RSA keys of at least 1024 bits.  Verifiers MUST be
   able to validate signatures with keys ranging from 1024 bits to 2048
   bits, and they MAY be able to validate signatures with larger keys.

   The signature value (expressed in base64) is stored in a JSON object
   (with the identifying text string "rsa") in a DKIM2-Signature header
   field.

3.3.  The Ed25519-SHA256 Signing Algorithm

   The Ed25519-SHA256 Signing Algorithm computes a hash over all the
   Message-Instance and DKIM2-Signature fields as described in
   Section 11.5 using SHA-256 (FIPS-180-4-2015) as the hash-alg.  It
   signs the hash with the PureEdDSA variant Ed25519, as defined in
   Section 5.1 of [RFC8032].

   The signature value (expressed in base64) is stored in a JSON object
   (with the identifying text string "ed25519") in a DKIM2-Signature
   header field.

3.4.  Other Algorithms

   Other algorithms MAY be defined in the future.  Verifiers MUST ignore
   any hashes or signatures using algorithms that they do not implement.

3.5.  Selectors

   To support multiple concurrent public keys per signing domain, the
   key namespace is subdivided using "selectors".

   The number of public keys and corresponding selectors for each domain
   is determined by the domain owner.  Many domain owners will use just
   one selector, whereas administratively distributed organizations can
   choose to manage disparate selectors and key pairs in different
   regions or on different email servers.  Selectors can also be used to
   delegate a signing authority, which can be withdraw at any time.
   Selectors also make it possible to seamlessly replace keys on a
   routine basis by signing with a new selector, while keeping the key
   associated with the old selector available.

   Periods are allowed in selectors and are component separators.
   Periods in selectors define DNS label boundaries in a manner similar
   to the conventional use in domain names.  This will allow portions of
   the selector namespace to be delegated.




Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   ABNF:

   selector = sub-domain *( "." sub-domain )

3.6.  Key Management

   Some level of assurance is required that a public key is associated
   with the claimed Signer.  DKIM2 does this by fetching the key from
   the DNS for the domain specified in the d= field of the
   DKIM2-Signature header field.

   DKIM2 keys are stored in a subdomain named "_domainkey".  Given a
   DKIM2-Signature field with a "d=" tag of "example.com" and a selector
   of "foo.bar", the DNS query will be for
   "foo.bar._domainkey.example.com".

   NOTE: these keys are no different, and are stored in the same
   locations as those for DKIM1 ([RFC6376]).

   Further details can be found in [DKIMKEYS].

4.  Recipes

   A set of "recipes" is used to recreate the previous version of the
   body and/or header fields of a message.  The recipes are provided
   within a JSON object with the schema:

   {
     "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
     "$id": "https://dkim2.org/schemas/recipe-v1",
     "title": "DKIM2 recipes",
     "description": "see draft-clayton-dkim2-spec",
     "type": "object",
     "properties": {
       "anyOf": [
         {
           "h": {
             "description": "recipes to recreate header fields",
             "oneOf": [
               {
                 "description": "no recipe has been provided",
                 "type": "object",
                 "maxProperties": 0
               },
               {
                 "type" : "array",
                 "items" : {
                   "header-field-name": "string",



Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


                   "description": "header fields to copy/discard/add",
                   "type": "array",
                   "recipes": { "type": "string" }
                 }
               }
             ]
           }
         },
         {
           "b": {
             "description": "recipes to recreate the body",
             "oneOf": [
               {
                 "description": "no recipe has been provided",
                 "type": "object",
                 "maxProperties": 0
               },
               {
                 "description": "body lines to copy/discard/add",
                 "type": "array",
                 "recipes": { "type": "string" }
               }
             ]
           }
         }
       ]
     }
   }

4.1.  Header Recipes

   A Header Recipe is an array of instructions applied to the specified
   header fields with the given header field name.  These instructions
   are applied in order to the message which has been received so as to
   recreate the message as it was before modifications were made.

   If there is no "h" field in the JSON object then there was no
   modification to the header fields.

   If the "h" field value is null (there are no recipes for any header
   field) then the previous state of the header fields cannot be
   recreated.  Verifiers of the message may be able to determine, by
   seeing which entity makes this declaration, that this is acceptable
   to them because, for example, that entity is providing a
   contractually arranged service.

   Matching of header field names is always done without regard to case.




Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   If a header field name is not present in the JSON object then all
   header fields with that header field name are to be retained.

   If there are no "recipes" for a header field name that is present in
   the JSON object then all instances of that header field are to be
   removed to reinstate the previous state of the message.

   Header fields are numbered "bottom up" (the opposite direction to the
   body lines).  That is to say, when walking the header fields from the
   top of the message to end of the header fields then the last header
   field instance encountered with any particular header field name is
   numbered 1, the header field (with the same header field name) above
   that is numbered 2, and so on.

   The header fields should be treated as being unwrapped (in the normal
   [RFC5321] manner).  That is, all of the physical lines that form a
   single header field are processed under the same logical number.

   The recipes are processed in order and the resulting header fields
   are emitted so that later header field will appear above earlier
   header fields in the recreated message.

   If the recipe is of the form "(" start "-" end ")" then this means
   that (relevant) header field lines from to start to end, inclusive,
   are to be emitted.  The start value of each of these recipes MUST be
   in ascending order and MUST be greater than the end value of all
   preceding recipes for this header field name.

   Otherwise the recipe is treated as a text string to which relevant
   header field name and a colon is prepended and a CRLF is appended and
   the resultant string is then emitted.  Note that the way in which
   hashes are calculated (see below) means that no heed needs to be
   taken of wrapping or the case of the header field name.  The text
   string MUST NOT contain CR or LF characters.  If the string is empty
   then the CRLF will immediately follow the header field name and
   colon.

4.2.  Body Recipes

   A Body Recipe is an array of instructions applied to message body
   which can recreate the message as it was before modifications were
   made.

   If there is no "b" field in the JSON object then there was no
   modification to the message body.  Note that the JSON schema requires
   either "h" or "b" to be present.





Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   If the "b" field is null (there are no recipes) then the previous
   state of the message body cannot be recreated.  Verifiers of the
   message may be able to determine, by seeing which entity makes this
   declaration, that this is acceptable to them because, for example,
   that entity is providing a contractually arranged service.

   Body lines are numbered "top down" (the opposite direction to the
   header fields).  The first line of the body (immediately after the
   blank line that indicates that there are no more header fields) is
   numbered 1.

   The recipes are processed in order and the resulting body lines
   fields are emitted so that later lines will appear below earlier
   lines in the recreated message.

   If the recipe is of the form "(" start "-" end ")" then this means
   that (relevant) message body lines from to start to end, inclusive,
   are to be emitted.  The start value of each of these recipes MUST be
   in ascending order and MUST be greater than the end value of all
   preceding Body Recipes.

   Otherwise the recipe is treated as a text string and a CRLF is
   appended and the resultant string is emitted.  The text string MUST
   NOT contain CR or LF characters.  If the string is empty then just a
   CRLF is emitted.

5.  Message Hash Values

   A set of cryptographic "hashes" are used to record the current
   message body and header fields.  The hashes are provided within a
   JSON object with the schema:




















Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   {
     "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
     "$id": "https://dkim2.org/schemas/hashes-v1",
     "title": "DKIM2 message hashes",
     "description": "see draft-clayton-dkim2-spec",
     "type": "object",
     "properties": {
       "h": {
         "description": "header hash name and value",
         "type": "array",
         "items": {"type": "string"},
         "minItems": 2, "maxItems": 2
       },
       "b": {
         "description": "body hash name and value",
         "type": "array",
         "items": {"type": "string"},
         "minItems": 2, "maxItems": 2
       }
     },
     "required": ["h", "b"]
   }

   To provide for algorithmic dexterity more that one hash value, using
   a different algorithm MAY be supplied.  A verifier MUST check all
   signatures that it understands and SHOULD treat any failure as
   invalidating all hashes.

   Although the body hash value will be incorporated into a Message-
   Instance header field, these header fields are ignored when
   calculating the header hash value and so the body hash and header
   hash may be calculated in any convenient order.

5.1.  Computing the Body Hash

   The body of messages is treated as merely a string of octets.  DKIM2
   messages MAY be either in plain-text or in MIME format; no special
   treatment is afforded to MIME content.  Message attachments in MIME
   format MUST be included in the content that is signed.

   The DKIM2 body hash is calculated in the same manner as DKIM1's
   "simple" scheme:

   All empty lines at the end of the message body are ignored.  An empty
   line is a line of zero length after removal of the line terminator.
   If there is no body or no trailing CRLF on the message body, a CRLF
   is added.  That is "*CRLF" at the end of the body is converted to
   "CRLF".



Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   No other changes are made to the body, which is then processed by the
   relevant hash algorithm(s).  The name of the hash and the hash value
   (converted to base64 form) is then inserted into (Signers) or
   compared to (Verifiers) a value in the "b" array entry of the "DKIM2
   message hashes" JSON object in the Message-Instance header field that
   is being created.  If multiple hashes are calculated then multiple
   entries within the "b" array will be inserted/compared.

5.2.  Computing the Header Fields Hash

   The header fields hash calculation done by a Signer MUST apply the
   following steps in the order given.  A Verifier will need to do the
   equivalent steps in order to check that the hash they have received
   is correct.

   *  Ignore some header fields

      When calculating the header field hash "Received" or "Return-Path"
      header fields MUST be ignored.  These are Trace headers as
      described in [RFC5321] and serve only to document details of the
      SMTP transmission process.

      When calculating the header field hash any header field with a
      header field name starting with "X-" MUST be ignored.  Currently
      deployed email systems use these fields as proprietary Trace
      headers which have no defined meaning for other systems and it
      considerably simplifies reporting on changes to header fields to
      ignore them.

      When calculating the header field hash any "Message-Instance" or
      "DKIM2-Signature" header fields MUST be ignored.  These header
      fields will be included in the hash value that will be signed by a
      DKIM2-Signature header field and it simplifies implementations if
      they are not included twice, especially when determining whether
      all modifications to a message have been correctly declared.

      When calculating the header field hash any "DKIM-Signature" header
      fields and any header fields whose field name starts with "ARC-"
      MUST be ignored.  Not including DKIM1 and ARC signatures means
      that systems that wish to add other types of signature as well as
      a DKIM2 signature are free to do this in any convenient order.

   *  Convert all header field names (not the header field values) to
      lowercase.  For example, convert "SUBJect: AbC" to "subject: AbC".







Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   *  Unfold all header field continuation lines as described in
      [RFC5322]; in particular, lines with terminators embedded in
      continued header field values (that is, CRLF sequences followed by
      WSP) MUST be interpreted without the CRLF.  Implementations MUST
      NOT remove the CRLF at the end of the header field value.

   *  Convert all sequences of one or more WSP characters to a single SP
      character.  WSP characters here include those before and after a
      line folding boundary.

   *  Delete all WSP characters at the end of each unfolded header field
      value.

   *  Delete any WSP characters remaining before and after the colon
      separating the header field name from the header field value.  The
      colon separator MUST be retained.

   *  Place the header fields in alphabetical order by the header field
      name.

   *  If there is more than one header with the same header field name
      then the header fields are placed in the order in which they occur
      in the message header, from the top downwards.

      It is sometimes suggested that some MTAs re-order header fields
      after they receive an email, if they do then it is their
      responsibility to recover the original order of any header fields
      with identical header field names (that are part of a signature
      calculation) before verifying an existing signature or passing a
      previously signed message to another MTA that is going to wish to
      verify a signature.

   *  The hash(es) of the concatenated header fields are calculated.

   The name of the hash and the hash value (converted to base64 form) is
   then inserted into a value in the "h" array entry of the "DKIM2
   message hashes" JSON object in the Message-Instance header field that
   is being created.  If multiple hashes are calculated then multiple
   entries within the "h" array will be inserted.

6.  SMTP parameters

   DKIM2 records the [RFC5321] MAIL FROM and RCPT TO values to be used
   when this message is transmitted over an SMTP link from the signing
   MTA.  These values are provided with a JSON object with the schema:






Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   {
     "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
     "$id": "https://dkim2.org/schemas/smtp-v1",
     "title": "DKIM2 SMTP parameters",
     "description": "see draft-clayton-dkim2-spec",
     "type": "object",
     "properties": {
       "description": "MAIL FROM",
       "mf": "string",
       "rt": {
         "description": "RCPT TO",
          "type" : "array",
           "minItems": 1,
           "items" : { "type": "string" }
       }
     },
     "required": ["mf", "rt"]
   }

   Note that MAIL FROM may be just "<>", for example for a Delivery
   Status Notification.

   When a message is intended for more than one recipient then the RCPT
   TO values provided MAY include all of the recipients so that a single
   copy of the email MAY be sent to all of the recipients in a single
   SMTP transaction.  Alternatively, multiple copies of the email may be
   generated so as to not immediately reveal who else received the
   email.

   However, if "bcc:" recipients are involved then in order to meet the
   requirements of [RFC5322] Section 3.6.3 each and every bcc recipients
   MUST NOT revealed to any other message recipient.

7.  Message Signature

   A set of cryptographic "hashes" are used to record the current
   message body and header fields.  The hashes are provided within a
   JSON object with the schema:













Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   {
     "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
     "$id": "https://dkim2.org/schemas/signature-v1",
     "title": "DKIM2 signatures",
     "description": "see draft-clayton-dkim2-spec",
     "type": "object",
     "properties": {
       "items": {
         "description": "selector, algorithm, value",
         "type": "array",
         "items": {"type": "string"},
         "minItems": 3, "maxItems": 3
       }
     }
   }

   The selector values subdivides the namespace for the domain being
   used for signing.  The algorithm value is the one used to generate
   the signature.  Verifiers MUST support "RSA-SHA256" for which the
   string "rsa" is used and "Ed25519-SHA256" for which the string
   "ed25519" is used; See Section 3 for a description of these
   algorithms.

   To provide for algorithmic dexterity more than further signatures,
   using different algorithms MAY be supplied.  A verifier MUST check
   all signatures that it understands and SHOULD treat any failure as
   invalidating all signatures.

   Since the DNS lookup for the public key will check that the algorithm
   is correct a different selector MUST necessarily be used for the
   second signature.

   The method for computing the signature values is given in
   Section 11.5

8.  Tag=Value Lists

   DKIM2 uses a simple "tag=value" syntax in the Message-Instance and
   DKIM2-Signature header fields, as well as in domain signature records
   (see [DKIMKEYS]).

   Values are a series of strings containing either plain text or
   "base64" text (as defined in [RFC2045], Section 6.8).  The name of
   the tag will determine the encoding of each value.  Unencoded
   semicolon (";") characters MUST NOT occur in the tag value, since
   that separates tag-specs.

   Formally, the ABNF syntax rules are as follows:



Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   tag-list  =  tag-spec *( ";" tag-spec ) [ ";" ]
   tag-spec  =  [FWS] tag-name [FWS] "=" [FWS] tag-value [FWS]
   tval      =  1*VALCHAR
   tag-name  =  ALPHA *ALNUMPUNC
   tag-value =  [ tval *( 1*(WSP / FWS) tval ) ]
                     ; Prohibits WSP and FWS at beginning and end

   Note that WSP is allowed anywhere around tags.  In particular, any
   WSP after the "=" and any WSP before the terminating ";" is not part
   of the value; however, WSP inside the value is significant.

   Tags MUST be interpreted in a case-sensitive manner.  Values MUST be
   processed as case sensitive unless the specific tag description of
   semantics specifies case insensitivity.

   Tags with duplicate names MUST NOT occur within a single tag-list; if
   a tag name does occur more than once, the entire tag-list is invalid.

   Whitespace within a value MUST be retained unless explicitly excluded
   by the specific tag description.

   Tag=value pairs that represent the default value MAY be included to
   aid legibility.

   Unrecognized tags MUST be ignored.

   Tags that have an empty value are not the same as omitted tags.  An
   omitted tag is treated as having the default value; a tag with an
   empty value explicitly designates the empty string as the value.

9.  The Message-Instance Header Field

   A Message-Instance header field documents the current contents of the
   message and, in the case of a Reviser records any relevant changes
   that have been made to the incoming message.

   The Message-Instance header field is a tag-list as described in
   Section 8.

   Tags on the Message-Instance header field along with their type,
   encoding and requirement status are shown below.

   v= The revision number of the Message-Instance header field.

   plain-text unsigned decimal integer; REQUIRED






Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   The originator of a message uses the value 1.  Further Message-
   Instance header fields are added with a value one more than the
   current highest numbered Message-Instance header field.  Gaps in the
   numbering MUST be treated as making the whole message impossible to
   verify.

   ABNF:

   mi-v-tag    = %x76 [FWS] "=" [FWS] 1*DIGIT

   r= The recipes that will allow recreation of the previous instance of
   the message.

   base64; OPTIONAL

   The r= tag value is the base64 encoded version of the JSON object
   that contains the recipes that allow the previous instance of the
   message to be recreated (see {#JSONrecipe}}.

   ABNF:

   mi-r-tag    = %x72 [FWS] "=" [FWS] base64string

   h= The hash values for the message

   base64; REQUIRED

   The h= tag value is the base64 encoded version of the JSON object
   that contains the hashes for the message (see {#JSONrhash}}.

   ABNF:

   mi-h-tag    = %x68 [FWS] "=" [FWS] base64string

10.  The DKIM2-Signature Header Field

   The signature of the email is stored in a DKIM2-Signature header
   field.  This header field contains all of the signature and key-
   fetching data.  The DKIM2-Signature value is a tag-list as described
   in Section 8.

   Tags on the DKIM2-Signature header field along with their type,
   encoding and requirement status are shown below.  It will be noted
   that we have not included a version number.  Experience from IMF
   onwards shows that it is essentially impossible to change version
   numbers.  If it becomes necessary to change DKIM2 in the sort of
   incompatible way that a v=2 / v=3 version number would support, it is
   expected that header fields will be labelled as DKIM3 instead.



Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   i= The sequence number of the DKIM2-Signature header field.

   plain-text unsigned decimal integer; REQUIRED

   The originator of a message uses the value 1.  Further
   DKIM2-Signature header fields are added with a value one more than
   the current highest numbered DKIM2-Signature header field.  Gaps in
   the numbering MUST be treated as making the whole message unsigned.

   ABNF:

   sig-i-tag    = %x69 [FWS] "=" [FWS] 1*DIGIT

   v= The highest numbered Message-Instance header field

   plain-text unsigned decimal integer; REQUIRED

   This value allows verifiers to determine which entity made a
   particular revision to the message body or header fields.

   ABNF:

   sig-v-tag    = %x76 [FWS] "=" [FWS] 1*DIGIT

   n= Nonce value

   textstring; OPTIONAL

   This value, if present, has a meaning to the creator of the signature
   but MUST NOT be assumed to have any meaning to any other entity.  It
   MAY be used as an index into a database to assist in handling
   Delivery Status Notifications or for any other purpose.

   To discourage use of the tag field as an alternative to the use of
   more appropriate header fields, the length of the textstring MUST NOT
   exceed 64 characters and implementations SHOULD reject messages where
   this limit has been ignored.

   ABNF:

   sig-n-tag    = %x6e [FWS] "=" [FWS] textstring

   t= Signature Timestamp

   plain-text date-time; REQUIRED






Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   The time that this header field was created.  The format is the
   number of seconds since 00:00:00 on January 1, 1970 in the UTC time
   zone.  The value is expressed as an unsigned integer in decimal
   ASCII.  This value is not constrained to fit into a 31- or 32-bit
   integer.

   Implementations SHOULD be prepared to handle values up to at least
   10^12 (until approximately AD 200,000; this fits into 40 bits).

   Implementations MAY ignore signatures that have a timestamp in the
   future.  Implementations MAY ignore signatures that are more than 14
   days old.

   ABNF:

   sig-t-tag    = %x74 [FWS] "=" [FWS] 1*DIGIT

   d= The domain associated with this signature.

   plain-text; REQUIRED

   This domain is used to form the query for the public key.  The domain
   MUST be a valid DNS name under which the DKIM2 key record is
   published.

   The domain in the d= tag MUST exactly match the rightmost labels of
   the domain-name part of the mf= tag.  That is to say, the domain-name
   of the mf= tag MUST either match the d= domain exactly or be a sub-
   domain of d= domain.

   ABNF:

   sig-d-tag   = %x64 [FWS] "=" [FWS] domain-name
   domain-name = sub-domain 1*("." sub-domain)
                            ; from [RFC5321] Domain,
                            ; excluding address-literal

   m= The SMTP parameters for the message

   base64; REQUIRED

   The m= (mail) tag value is the base64 encoded version of the JSON
   object that contains the MAIL FROM and RCPT TO parameters that will
   be used when the message is transmitted over SMTP from the signing
   MTA (see {#JSONsmtp}}.

   ABNF:




Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   mi-m-tag    = %x6d [FWS] "=" [FWS] base64string

   s= The signature value(s) for the message

   base64; REQUIRED

   The s= tag value is the base64 encoded version of the JSON object
   that contains the signature(s) for the message (see
   {#JSONsignature}}.

   ABNF:

   mi-s-tag    = %x73 [FWS] "=" [FWS] base64string

   f= Flags

   plain text; OPTIONAL

   Flags serve two purposes; they either report what has been done to
   the message by the system creating the DKIM2-Signature or they make a
   request to systems that handle the mail thereafter.  Flags are
   separated by commas, and optional white-space allows systems to add
   several flags without creating long lines.

   If a flag value is not recognised it MUST be ignored.

   The flag values that report things are:

   "exploded": this message (identified by its unique header hash value
   (recorded in the h= JSON object of the relevant Message-Instance) is
   being sent to more than one email address.  An MTA which receives a
   message MAY use this information to help it distinguish between
   malicious "DKIM replay" and legitimate activity performed by mailing
   list.  If this flag is not present in at least one DKIM2-Signature
   header field then an MTA MAY assume that only one copy of a
   particular message (identified by relevant cryptographic hash values)
   is intended to exist;

   The flags values that make requests are:

   "donotexplode": this signer requests that the message not be sent to
   more than one recipient.  A system that, by local policy, ignores
   this request MUST NOT allow any of the copies it creates to be
   forwarded on to any MTA outside its control.







Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   "donotmodify": this signer requests that the message not be modified
   from the form in which it is sent.  A system that, by local policy,
   ignores this request MUST NOT allow the message to be forwarded on to
   any MTA outside its control.

   "feedback": this signer requests feedback about how this message is
   handled during delivery and thereafter.  This document does not
   describe what such feedback might be or where it might be delivered.
   If this flag is absent then feedback is explicitly not required.

   ABNF:

   sig-f-tag        = %x66 [FWS] "=" [FWS] sig-f-tag-data
                      *("," [FWS] sig-f-tag-data)
   sig-f-tag-data   = "donotmodify" | "donotexplode" | "feedback" |
                      "exploded" | x-sig-f-tag-data
   x-sig-f-tag-data = ALPHA *(ALPHA / DIGIT)
                            ; for later extension

11.  Signer Actions

   This section gives the actions that need to be undertaken by the
   signer of a message.  They may be done in any appropriate order.

11.1.  Add any Necessary Message-Instance Header Fields

   If a system is generating the initial form of a message or if it a
   Reviser that has made to changes to the message body and/or header
   fields then it MUST compute the body hash as described in Section 5.1
   and the hash of the header fields as described in Section 5.2.

   If the message does not contain a Message-Instance header field then
   one MUST be added.

   If hashing the message body or relevant header fields does not give
   the same hash values as those recorded in the highest version (v=)
   Message-Instance header field then a new Message-Instance header
   field MUST be added.  This Message-Instance header field MUST contain
   "recipes" to be able to recreate the message corresponding to the
   hash values in the currently highest numbered Message-Instance header
   field, or a null recipe to indicate that recreating the previous
   version of the message will not be possible.

   A system may add more than one Message-Instance header field if it
   wishes to do so, but the DKIM2 design allows all modifications made
   by any single system to be documented in a single Message-Instance
   header field.




Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 23]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   Note that the first (v=1) Message-Instance header fieldMAY contain
   "recipes" if it is wished to record any changes made to a message as
   it enters the DKIM2 ecosystem.  All other Message-Instance header
   fields SHOULD contain at least one "recipe".

11.2.  Provide a "chain of custody" for the message

   To construct the DKIM2-Signature header field contains the MAIL FROM
   and RCPT TO values that will be used when the message is transmitted
   so these [RFC5321] "envelope" values MUST be available to (or
   deducible by) a Signer.

   The receiver of a message will check for an exact match (including
   the local parts of the email addresses) between the MAIL FROM / RCPT
   TO [RFC5321] protocol values and the values in the highest numbered
   (most recent) DKIM2-Signature header field.  It is acceptable for
   there to be more RCPT TO email addresses recorded in the header field
   that are actually used in the SMTP conversation, but any RCPT TO
   value which is used MUST be present.

   Verifiers will check for a relaxed domain match (see {relaxed-domain-
   match}) between the signing domain (d=) and the domain in the MAIL
   FROM value.

   When the message being signed already has a DKIM2-Signature header
   field (i.e. it has already been transmitted at least once) then a
   valid "chain of custody" MUST be apparent when all of the
   DKIM2-Signature header fields are considered.  This "chain of
   custody" contributes to the way in which DKIM2 tackles "DKIM replay"
   attacks.  The "chain of custody" uses a relaxed domain match (see
   {relaxed-domain-match}).

   In any situation where a messages will be forwarded in such a way
   that the mf= on the outgoing message is such that the "chain of
   custody" would be broken then the Signer MUST generate an extra
   DKIM2-Signature header field that causes values to match, i.e. a
   record must be fabricated that documents the mail being passed from
   one domain to another.

   It will be noted that the creation of this extra header field will
   require the Signer to have access to a DKIM2 private key associated
   with a domain in the RCPT TO entry.  This is often achieved by the
   Signer creating the private key and never sharing it.  The Signer
   gives the public key (and selector value) to the domain owner who
   creates an appropriate DNS entry.  Alternatively, the Signer creates
   a public key DNS entry within a part of the DNS that they control and
   the domain owner merely needs to publish a CNAME pointing at this.




Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 24]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


11.3.  The Relaxed Domain Match Algorithm

   To assist in addressing the "DKIM replay" problem DKIM2 provides a
   "chain of custody" for every message.  This is established by
   checking that the MAIL FROM value recorded in every DKIM2-Signature
   header field (except of course the i=1 instance) can be matched with
   a RCPT TO value of the next lower numbered DKIM2-Signature header
   field.

   It is also necessary to check DKIM2-Signature header fields for a
   match between the signing domain (specified in the d= tag) and the
   MAIL FROM domain.

   To allow systems to use existing "bounce-handling" schemes with
   special subdomains in their MAIL FROM values a "relaxed" approach is
   taken to the matches between these values.

   *  Only the domain part of the MAIL FROM and RCPT TO values is used
      for these matches The local part (and the @) are ignored.

   *  If there is not an exact match between the domain names then
      labels are removed, one by one from the left hand side of the MAIL
      FROM domain name and the comparison is repeated.

   *  If no labels remain then there is no match.

11.4.  Select a Private Key and Corresponding Selector Value

   This specification does not define the basis by which a Signer should
   choose which private key and selector value to use -- this will be a
   matter of administrative convenience.  Distribution and management of
   private keys is also outside the scope of this document.

11.5.  Calculate a Signature Value

   A Signer calculates a hash solely over the Message-Instance and
   DKIM2-Signature header fields of the message and then signs this hash
   value.  The hashes of the body and other header fields are covered by
   the hashes in the highest version (v=) Message-Instance header field.

   Note that the DKIM2-Signature header field contains a signature but
   does not give the hash value that was signed.  This permits
   flexibility for any future signature schemes where a relevant hash
   value may not be readily available (or may be inordinately long).

   The signature algorithm MUST apply the following steps in the order
   given.




Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 25]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   *  Convert all relevant header field names (not the header field
      values) to lowercase.  For example, convert "DKIM2-signature" to
      "dkim2-signature".

   *  Unfold all header field continuation lines as described in
      [RFC5322]; in particular, lines with terminators embedded in
      continued header field values (that is, CRLF sequences followed by
      WSP) MUST be interpreted without the CRLF.  Implementations MUST
      NOT remove the CRLF at the end of the header field value.

   *  Convert all sequences of one or more WSP characters to a single SP
      character.  WSP characters here include those before and after a
      line folding boundary.

   *  Delete all WSP characters at the end of each unfolded header field
      value.

   *  Delete any WSP characters remaining before and after the colon
      separating the header field name from the header field value.  The
      colon separator MUST be retained.

   *  Place the header fields in order.  First come the Message-Instance
      header fields in ascending version (v=) order.  Second are the
      DKIM2-Signature header fields in ascending sequence (i=) order.
      Last of all is an incomplete DKIM2-Signature header field (the one
      that this system is creating) with all tags present except that
      the signature value (s=) is null (that is the base64 value is
      absent).

   *  The hash of the concatenated header fields is calculated and this
      value is then signed using an the appropriate algorithm and the
      selector value, algorithm identifier and the base64 encoded value
      of the signature value are placed into the JSON object for the
      message signature.  Any further signatures are calculated and
      added to the array within the JSON object (see Section 7

   The JSON object holding the signature is then converted to base64 and
   inserted into the s= tag of the DKIM2-Signature header field which
   MUST then be placed into the message.

12.  Verifier Actions

   This section discusses the actions taken by a Verifier.  In essence
   this will involve repeating all the actions taken by a Signer to
   produce a Message-Instance or DKIM2-Signature header field.  To avoid
   a lot of repetition these actions will not be spelled out in detail.
   Once a hash value has been calculated it is then compared with the
   value reported by the Signer, or the Signer's public key is used to



Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 26]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   determine whether the signature that has been provided is correct.

12.1.  Output States

   A verification ends in one of three states, which this document
   refers to as follows:

   SUCCESS: a successful verification

   PERMFAIL: a permanent, non-recoverable error such as a signature
   verification failure or mismatched hash value

   TEMPFAIL: a temporary, recoverable error such as a DNS query timeout

   A verifier MAY cease verifying once a single failure is detected.

   Verifiers wishing to communicate the results of verification to other
   parts of the mail system may do so in whatever manner they see fit.
   For example, implementations might choose to add an email header
   field to the message before passing it on.  Any such header field
   SHOULD be inserted before any existing DKIM2-Signature or pre-
   existing authentication status header fields in the header field
   block.  The Authentication-Results: header field ([RFC8601]) MAY be
   used for this purpose.  It should be noted that any "Authentication-
   Results" header field will count as a modification to the email if
   any further DKIM2-Signature header fields are to be generated.

12.2.  Validation of Tag Fields

   Implementers MUST meticulously validate the format and values of
   Message-Instance and DKIM2-Signature header fields.  Errors SHOULD be
   treated as a PERMFAIL (signature syntax error).  Being "liberal in
   what you accept" is an inappropriate strategy.

   Note, however, that the presence of unknown tags in a DKIM2-Signature
   header field (or a Message-Instance header field), MUST NOT cause a
   verification to fail.

   Verifiers MAY return PERMFAIL ("signature expired") if it is more
   than 14 days since the timestamp recorded in the "t=" tag of a
   DKIM2-Signature header field.

12.3.  Fetching the Public Key

   The public key of a signature is needed to complete the verification
   process.  Details of key management and representation are described
   in Section 3.6 and [DKIMKEYS].  The Verifier MUST validate the key
   record and MUST ignore any public key records that are malformed.



Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 27]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   When validating a message, a Verifier MUST perform the following
   steps in a manner that is semantically the same as performing them in
   the order indicated; in some cases, the implementation may
   parallelize or reorder these steps, as long as the semantics remain
   unchanged:

   1.  The Verifier retrieves the public key as described in Section 3.6
       using the "d=" tag, and the selector from within the JSON object
       in the "s" tag.  If there is more than one signature within the
       JSON object then these steps are repeated for each one.

   2.  If the query for the public key fails to complete, the Verifier
       MAY seek a later verification attempt by returning TEMPFAIL ("key
       unavailable").

   3.  If the query for the public key fails because the corresponding
       key record does not exist, the Verifier MUST return PERMFAIL ("no
       key for signature").

   4.  If the query for the public key returns multiple key records,
       then the return PERMFAIL ("more than one key returned" since this
       is not permitted by [DKIMKEYS]).

   5.  If the result returned from the query does not adhere to the
       format defined in the DKIM key specification [DKIMKEYS], the
       Verifier MUST ignore the key record and return PERMFAIL ("key
       syntax error").  Verifiers are urged to validate the syntax of
       key records carefully to avoid attacks.  In particular, the
       Verifier MUST ignore keys with a version code ("v=" tag) that
       they do not implement.

   6.  If the public key data (the "p=" tag) is empty, then this key has
       been revoked and the Verifier MUST treat this as a failed
       signature check and return PERMFAIL ("key revoked").  There is no
       defined semantic difference between a key that has been revoked
       and a key record that has been removed.

   7.  If the public key data is not suitable for use with the algorithm
       specified in the DKIM-Signature header field, the Verifier MAY
       immediately return PERMFAIL ("inappropriate key algorithm").
       However, the tag fields in the public key record that would cause
       this to occur are now deprecated so DKIM2 implementations MAY
       ignore these tag fields altogether.








Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 28]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   8.  If the "h=" tag exists in the public key record and the hash
       algorithm implied by the type of signature being checked is not
       included in the contents of the "h=" tag, the Verifier MUST
       ignore the key record and return PERMFAIL ("inappropriate hash
       algorithm").

12.4.  Perform the Signature Verification Calculation

   Given a Signer and a public key, verifying a signature consists of
   actions semantically equivalent to the following steps.

   1.  Prepare a canonicalized version of the Message-Instance and
       DKIM2-Signature header fields as described in Section 11.5.  Note
       that this canonicalized version does not actually replace the
       original content.

   2.  Based on the algorithm indicated in the JSON object holding the
       signatures compute the signatures of the canonical copy.  Then
       verify that the there is a match with the hash value from the
       JSON object.  If the signature does not validate, the Verifier
       SHOULD ignore the signature and return PERMFAIL ("signature did
       not verify").

   3.  Otherwise, the signature has correctly verified.

   4.  If there is more than one signature provided then they MUST all
       be checked if the verifier is able to do so.

   5.  If any signature fails then an error SHOULD be reported.

   6.  If some signatures fail and other pass then the error that is
       reported should provide that information (e.g. PERMFAIL "RSA
       signature passed, elliptic curve signature failed")

   The reasoning for requiring that all signatures pass is that if a
   signature scheme has recently become deprecated because it is known
   to be cryptographically flawed then Signers will use a second
   (unbroken) signature scheme.  However, such a Signer may still
   provide the other signature for the benefit of Verifiers that have
   yet to upgrade -- reasoning perhaps that attacks are too expensive to
   be a very significant security issue.  A Verifier that determines
   that one signature passes whilst the other fails may well be in a
   position to prevent an attack.








Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 29]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


12.5.  Check Most Recent Signature and Hashes for the Message

   A Verifier SHOULD check the validity of the most recently applied
   (highest numbered i= value) DKIM2-Signature header field and the
   associated (v=) Message-Instance before accepting an email.  If this
   check does not pass then a Delivery Status Notification for the email
   MUST NOT be generated thereafter -- hence the best strategy, if the
   email is not wanted, is to reject it (with a 5xx error code) whilst
   the relevant SMTP conversation is still ongoing.  If the check gives
   a TEMPFAIL result then a 4xx error code SHOULD be used to allow the
   sending MTA to understand the situation.

   A Verifier SHOULD check that the MAIL FROM value in the most recent
   DKIM2-Signature header field is identical to the [RFC5321] MAIL FROM
   values of the SMTP protocol interaction that delivered the email to
   the Verifier.  A Verifier SHOULD also check that all of the [RFC5321]
   RCPT TO values from the SMTP protocol occur in the most recent
   DKIM2-Signature header field.  The values MUST BE put into lower-case
   before doing these checks.  Note that these check MUST NOT use the
   relaxed domain match algorithm.

   A Verifier SHOULD check that there is a relaxed domain match (see
   {relaxed-domain-match}) between the signing domain of the most
   recently applied DKIM2-Signature header field and the mf= value in
   that header field.

   A Verifier SHOULD also check the chain of custody for the message
   (see {chain-of-custody}) is valid, using a relaxed domain match (see
   {#relaxed-domain-match}).

   Should checking these signatures (all but the most recently applied)
   give the status TEMPFAIL then it may be possible for the Verifier to
   determine the validity of the signature at a later time.  It the
   TEMPFAIL status continues to occur, or if a PERMFAIL is encountered
   then this MAY be reported to the sending MTA by means of a Delivery
   Status Notification.  However the non-validating email MUST NOT be
   forwarded to any MTA outside of the current organisation.

12.6.  Checking the Message-Instance Header Fields

   The highest numbered (v=) Message-Instance header field SHOULD be
   checked to determine that the message body has not been altered since
   the body hash was calculated.

   If the message has been modified since its original creation then the
   Message-Instance header fields will enable a Verifier to determine
   whether or not all the changes made are correctly recorded by using
   the "recipes" to construct each preceding version of the message.



Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 30]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   Note that if it is only the first form of the message is of interest
   then all the "recipes" can be applied in turn and only one hash value
   checked -- the correctness of the intermediate hash values are not
   relevant to this assessment.

12.7.  Checking the DKIM2-Signature Header Fields

   However, in order to check the chain of custody, to assess whether
   the message has been exploded, to pick out "feedback" requests to be
   honoured or to assign reputation to Revisers then all of the
   DKIM2-Signature header fields will have to checked for validity.  The
   TBA document explores these issues in more detail.

12.8.  Interpret Results/Apply Local Policy

   It is beyond the scope of this specification to describe what actions
   the recipient of an email performs, but mail carrying valid DKIM2
   signatures gives the recipient opportunities that unauthenticated
   email would not.  Specifically, an authenticated email provides
   predictable information by which other decisions can reliably be
   managed, such as trust and reputation.  Conversely, it is hard to
   assign trust or reputation to unauthenticated email.

   If an MTA wishes to reject messages where signatures are missing or
   do not verify, the handling MTA SHOULD use a 550/5.7.x reply code.

   Where the Verifier is integrated within the MTA and it is not
   possible to fetch the public key, perhaps because the key server is
   not available, a temporary failure message MAY be generated using a
   451/4.7.5 reply code, such as:

   451 4.7.5 Unable to verify signature - key server unavailable

   Temporary failures such as inability to access the key server or
   other external service are the only conditions that SHOULD use a 4xx
   SMTP reply code.  In particular, cryptographic signature verification
   failures MUST NOT provoke 4xx SMTP replies.

13.  Delivery Status Notifications in the DKIM2 ecosystem

   In the DKIM2 ecosystem, when a message cannot be delivered then this
   is reported to the sending machine by means of an [RFC5321] return
   code or, if the SMTP session has completed, by generating a Delivery
   Status Notification (DSN, as defined in [RFC3461].

   A DSN MUST be addressed to the MTA that sent the message.  This
   prevents "backscatter" by passing failures back along the chain of
   MTAs that were in involved in passing the message forwards.  This is



Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 31]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   achieved by using the mf= tag from the highest numbered
   DKIM2-Signature field.  If this field is null ("mf=<>") then a DNS
   MUST NOT be sent.

13.1.  DSN contents

   As set out in [RFC3461], the DSN has a top-level MIME part of type
   multipart/report.  Among other things, that MIME part must contain a
   MIME part of type message/rfc822 that holds either the original
   message exactly as it was submitted by the sending system or just the
   header fields of that message.

   All relevant DKIM2-Signature header fields (and Message-Instance
   header fields if the message body is supplied) MUST verify.  The DSN
   itself MUST have appropriate Message-Instance and DKIM2-Signature
   fields, noting that the MAIL FROM to be used will be null ("<>").

   If the message body has been truncated (rather than omitted
   altogether) then in order to allow verification of the DNS contents a
   Message-Instance header field MUST be added to the message with a
   body recipe of "z".

13.1.1.  Bounce propagation

   A Forwarder which receives a DSN MAY decide to propagate this DSN to
   the MAIL FROM address used to deliver the message to it (which can be
   found in the relevant DKIM2-Signature header field).  The DSN SHOULD
   be handled in the usual way, with Message-Instance header fields
   documenting any changes and a DKIM2-Signature field with an
   incremented hop count value added.

   The Forwarder MAY alternatively decide to reconstruct the message (or
   just the message header fields) as they were when the message was
   delivered to the Forwarder and construct a DSN using that
   information.  The information in Message-Instance header fields can
   be used to achieve this.  The resultant DSN is sent to the MAIL FROM
   address from the now highest numbered DKIM2-Signature header field.
   Doing this will ensure that details of where the message was
   forwarded to will not be revealed to the previous hop.

13.1.2.  Authentication of inbound bounce notifications

   When a system receives a DKIM2 signed bounce notification, and the
   included original message is also DKIM2 signed, it SHOULD verify that
   this message (or just the header fields if the body is not present)
   has not been altered.

   This means:



Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 32]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   1) The DSN's DKIM2-Signature will have a signing domain that is
   aligned with the recipient of the message that is being returned.
   The recipient's address is located in the rt= tag of the last
   (highest i= tag) DKIM2-Signature in the returned message.

   1) The last (highest i= tag) DKIM2-Signature header field of the
   returned message will be one that was generated by the system
   receiving the bounce notification, determined by examining the d= and
   mf= tags of that DKIM2-Signature header field.

   1) The header fields of the embedded message (in the message/rfc822
   MIME part) can be verified.  If the message body is present then that
   can also be verified by inspecting the Message-Instance header
   field(s).

   If the verification fails then the DSN MUST NOT be propagated any
   further.  If verification has been performed prior to accepting the
   DSN from the sender the DSN SHOULD be rejected with a 550/5.7.x
   return code.  If the verification cannot be completed because of a
   temporary issue (with DNS lookups) then a 4xx return code should be
   used.

14.  Preventing Transport Conversions

   DKIM2's design is predicated on valid input.

   In order to be signed a message will need to be in "network normal"
   format (text is ASCII encoded, lines are separated with CRLF
   characters, etc.).

   A message that is not compliant with [RFC5322], [RFC2045], [RFC2047]
   and other relevant message format standards can be subject to
   attempts by intermediaries to correct or interpret such content.  See
   Section 8 of [RFC6409] for examples of changes that are commonly
   made.  Such "corrections" may invalidate DKIM2 signatures or have
   other undesirable effects, including some that involve changes to the
   way a message is presented to an end user.

   When calculating the hash on messages that will be transmitted using
   base64 or quoted-printable encoding, Signers MUST compute the hash
   after the encoding.  Likewise, the Verifier MUST incorporate the
   values into the hash before decoding the base64 or quoted-printable
   text.  However, the hash MUST be computed before transport-level
   encodings such as SMTP "dot-stuffing" (the modification of lines
   beginning with a "." to avoid confusion with the SMTP end-of-message
   marker, as specified in [RFC5321]).





Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 33]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   Further, if the message contains local encoding that will be modified
   before transmission, that modification to canonical [RFC5322] form
   MUST be done before signing.  In particular, bare CR or LF characters
   (used by some systems as a local line separator convention) MUST be
   converted to the SMTP-standard CRLF sequence before the message is
   signed.  Any conversion of this sort SHOULD be applied to the message
   actually sent to the recipient(s), not just to the version presented
   to the signing algorithm.

   More generally, the Signer MUST sign the message as it is expected to
   be received by the Verifier rather than in some local or internal
   form.

15.  EAI ([RFC6530]) considerations for DKIM2

   TBA

16.  IANA Considerations

   TBA

17.  Security Considerations

   TBA

18.  Changes from Earlier Versions

   draft-clayton-dkim2-spec-08

   No changes that would affect an implementor, but tidied up the text
   as a result of the change to JSON and reordered several of the
   sections.

   draft-clayton-dkim2-spec-07

   Mapped various fields in Message-Instance and DKIM2-Signature into
   JSON.  Removed restriction on no recipe for v=1 Message-Instance.
   Allowed indefinite number of algorithms rather than just 2.

   draft-clayton-dkim2-spec-06

   Changed r= to rb= and r.fieldname to rh=fieldname because the tags in
   a tag value field may not use "-" characters.  Also fixed the ABNF.

   Incorporated Allen Robinson's BOUNCE draft.

   Assorted other very minor fixes.




Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 34]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   draft-clayton-dkim2-spec-05

   Assorted fixes, with particular thanks to Hannah Stern.  Clarified
   that there are two types of rt/mt matches performed.  Specified that
   recipes must not contain overlaps.  Set out the need for matching mf=
   and d= and put the relaxed domain match algorithm into its own
   section.  Set out that in practice all DKIM2-Signature header fields
   will need to be checked.

   draft-clayton-dkim2-spec-04

   Added a definition of a Reviser.  Incorporate the Message-Instance
   scheme previously found in ALGEBRA.  Recast the text relating to
   hashes and signatures accordingly.  Changed t= back to just digits.

   draft-clayton-dkim2-spec-03

   Removed the pp= proposal, and briefly explained how signers often
   handle private keys on behalf of domain owners.  Changed t= to be
   human-readable.  Fixed description of body canonicalisation to match
   DKIM1/relaxed.

   draft-clayton-dkim2-spec-02

   Further clarifications and tidying up; alignment of ALGEBRA
   description with the new MailVersion header field-name; addition of
   h= tag field.  Also added the pp= mechanism to address forwarders who
   do not have private keys to hand to make the rt/mf/rt chains
   validate.

   draft-clayton-dkim2-spec-01

   Significant re-ordering of sections and removal of repetitious
   material.

   Relax the matching algorithm between rt= and mf=

   [[This section to be removed by RFC Editor]]

19.  References

19.1.  Normative References

   [DKIMKEYS] Chuang, W., "Domain Name Specification for DKIM2", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-chuang-dkim2-dns-03, 20
              October 2025, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-chuang-dkim2-dns-03>.




Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 35]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
              STD 13, RFC 1034, DOI 10.17487/RFC1034, November 1987,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1034>.

   [RFC2045]  Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
              Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message
              Bodies", RFC 2045, DOI 10.17487/RFC2045, November 1996,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2045>.

   [RFC2047]  Moore, K., "MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions)
              Part Three: Message Header Extensions for Non-ASCII Text",
              RFC 2047, DOI 10.17487/RFC2047, November 1996,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2047>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC3461]  Moore, K., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) Service
              Extension for Delivery Status Notifications (DSNs)",
              RFC 3461, DOI 10.17487/RFC3461, January 2003,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3461>.

   [RFC4648]  Josefsson, S., "The Base16, Base32, and Base64 Data
              Encodings", RFC 4648, DOI 10.17487/RFC4648, October 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4648>.

   [RFC5234]  Crocker, D., Ed. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5234, January 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5234>.

   [RFC5321]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 5321,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5321, October 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5321>.

   [RFC5322]  Resnick, P., Ed., "Internet Message Format", RFC 5322,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5322, October 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5322>.

   [RFC6376]  Crocker, D., Ed., Hansen, T., Ed., and M. Kucherawy, Ed.,
              "DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) Signatures", STD 76,
              RFC 6376, DOI 10.17487/RFC6376, September 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6376>.






Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 36]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   [RFC6409]  Gellens, R. and J. Klensin, "Message Submission for Mail",
              STD 72, RFC 6409, DOI 10.17487/RFC6409, November 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6409>.

   [RFC6530]  Klensin, J. and Y. Ko, "Overview and Framework for
              Internationalized Email", RFC 6530, DOI 10.17487/RFC6530,
              February 2012, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6530>.

   [RFC8259]  Bray, T., Ed., "The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Data
              Interchange Format", STD 90, RFC 8259,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8259, December 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8259>.

   [RFC8601]  Kucherawy, M., "Message Header Field for Indicating
              Message Authentication Status", RFC 8601,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8601, May 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8601>.

19.2.  Informative References

   [CONCLUDEARC]
              Adams, J. T. and J. R. Levine, "Concluding the ARC
              Experiment", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              adams-arc-experiment-conclusion-01, 4 December 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-adams-arc-
              experiment-conclusion-01>.

   [RFC5598]  Crocker, D., "Internet Mail Architecture", RFC 5598,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5598, July 2009,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5598>.

   [RFC8017]  Moriarty, K., Ed., Kaliski, B., Jonsson, J., and A. Rusch,
              "PKCS #1: RSA Cryptography Specifications Version 2.2",
              RFC 8017, DOI 10.17487/RFC8017, November 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8017>.

   [RFC8032]  Josefsson, S. and I. Liusvaara, "Edwards-Curve Digital
              Signature Algorithm (EdDSA)", RFC 8032,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8032, January 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8032>.

   [RFC8617]  Andersen, K., Long, B., Ed., Blank, S., Ed., and M.
              Kucherawy, Ed., "The Authenticated Received Chain (ARC)
              Protocol", RFC 8617, DOI 10.17487/RFC8617, July 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8617>.

Authors' Addresses




Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 37]

Internet-Draft              DKIM2 Signatures                  March 2026


   Richard Clayton
   Yahoo
   Email: rclayton@yahooinc.com


   Wei Chuang
   Google
   Email: weihaw@google.com


   Bron Gondwana
   Fastmail Pty Ltd
   Level 2, 114 William Street
   3000
   Australia
   Phone: +61 457 416 436
   Email: brong@fastmailteam.com


































Clayton, et al.         Expires 3 September 2026               [Page 38]
